# Responses of soil WEOM quantity and quality to freeze–thaw and litter manipulation with contrasting soil water content: A laboratory experiment

Haohao Wu a,b,c , Xingkai $\mathrm { { X u } } ^ { \mathrm { b , c , * } }$ , Pingqing $\mathrm { F u } ^ { \mathrm { d } }$ , Weiguo Cheng e , Congsheng Fu a

a Key Laboratory of Watershed Geographic Sciences, Nanjing Institute of Geography and Limnology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 73 East Beijing Road, Nanjing   
210008, China   
b State Key Laboratory of Atmospheric Boundary Layer Physics and Atmospheric Chemistry, Institute of Atmospheric Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing   
100029, China   
c Department of Atmospheric Chemistry and Environmental Science, College of Earth, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China   
d Institute of Surface-Earth System Science, School of Earth System Science, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300072, China   
e Faculty of Agriculture, Yamagata University, Tsuruoka 997-8555, Japan

# A R T I C L E I N F O

Keywords:   
Dissolved organic matter   
Fluorescence spectroscopy   
Soil moisture   
Freeze–thaw cycles   
Litter decomposition   
Microbial properties

# A B S T R A C T

Future climatic change is likely to increase the occurrence of soil freeze–thaw (FT) events in high latitude and/or high altitude zones, which can substantially influence the dynamics of dissolved organic matter (DOM) released into the soils. However, it is not clear how the quantity and quality of soil DOM respond to changing FT patterns under different soil moisture and litter manipulation conditions in northern temperate forest stands. In this study, litter-amended and non-amended forest soils were incubated for 360 days at three soil moisture levels $( 3 0 \%$ , $6 0 \%$ , and $9 0 \%$ water-filled pore space) and three intensities of FT disturbance (low, high, and none). We quantified heterotrophic respiration, enzyme activity, microbial biomass, and water-extractable organic matter (WEOM) as a proxy for DOM in soils during the incubation experiment. The quality of WEOM was characterized by biodegradability, UV absorbance and parallel factor analysis modelling of fluorescence excitation emission matrices. Concentrations of water-extractable organic carbon (WEOC) and biodegradable WEOC declined continuously in all treatments over the 360-day incubation period. The dominant component of fluorescent WEOM shifted from humic- and fulvic- like components during the first 108 days of incubation, to protein-like components of microbial origin, characterized by high aromaticity, at the end of the incubation period. Litter amendment, FT disturbance, and their interaction increased WEOC concentrations in soils during the early 108- day incubation period, particularly in soils with low moisture and high FT intensity, but these increases disappeared after 252 days incubation at ${ } ^ { 1 5 } \ ^ { \circ } \mathrm { C }$ . Litter-derived fluorescent WEOM in soils without FT disturbance was dominated by protein-like components after 14 days of incubation, but these were replaced by humic- and fulvic-like components after 108 days. This replacement effect was weaker in soils with FT disturbance, which we attribute to changes in microbial properties, including enzyme activity, microbial biomass and activity.

# 1. Introduction

In deciduous forests in the cold temperate zone, plant litter fall occurs as a pulse in late autumn and is one of the largest annual inputs of dissolved organic matter (DOM) into soil (Kalbitz et al., 2000; Wardle et al., 2004). Litter-derived DOM may be absorbed into the soil, discharged as run-off into adjacent aquatic habitats, or released into the atmosphere as greenhouse gases via microbial activity (Kiikkila et al., 2012a; Cuss and Gu´eguen, 2013; Yang et al., 2015). Ultimately, the fate of DOM released during litter decomposition depends on traits such as aromaticity, mobility, and degradation (Hobara et al., 2014). However, it is difficult to predict how composition of plant litter determines the quantity and quality of soil DOM during litter decomposition, as it varied to shifts in environmental conditions, such as temperature, moisture, nutrient availability, and microbial and enzyme activity.

Leaf litter in the cold temperate zone is subject to freeze–thaw (FT) disturbance in late autumn, followed by long-term freezing over the winter, and a second period of FT activity in early spring. Increasing